it's still today I questioned myself
whether I know what's right and what's
wrong having a hard time being able to
even trust myself ultimately learning
you've made a critical mistake you
underestimated the mind power and will
of your victims these amazing and
accomplished athletes but we were
mentally strong enough to endure your
countless hours of abuse strong enough
to endure the pain of keeping your
secret strong enough to be pushed down
and repressed by MSU USAG in the USOC we
were ultimately strong enough to take
you down not what I won but by an army
of survivors we are Jade dose no more I
will always love gymnastics but I will
never be able to look at the sport the
same because of you now as I look to the
future I plan to pursue a career in
criminal justice I'm hoping that by
working to put masters like you away I
might be able to stop the nightmares and
start healing there's peace and knowing
that you will never be able to watch the
streets again and hurt any other little
girls Joe checking on this master
deserves nothing but the absolute
maximum such and said this court can
impose under this plea agreement Larry
if you haven't listened to one thing I
am said you need to look at me and
listen I only hope that when you get a
chance to speak you tell us who knew
what and when they knew it did Dean
dream well did Brook lemon know how much
did Kathy clay guess no did Mark Hollis
ever talk to you about your treatments
did anyone on the Board of Trustees no
did we have assignment no and lastly -
John get her no resume the innocence of
little girls in the bedroom
Jim if you truly want us to heal you
will do this for us thank you
[Applause]
you are really strong sister survivor
and you're strong enough to talking for
your voice is strong your passion is
there I can tell you're healing and your
sister survivors are feeling as well and
your voice change and allowing other men
and women to talk about what's happened
to them because there are so many others
who have come forward even in this one
we know that the numbers tell us that
but very very well we have a strong will
have the power back you have you laid
back and what do you want to do in
criminal justice I'm undecided about
that either in the courtroom or criminal
investigators well either one is great
thank you into the courtroom yeah I'm
hoping that you practice you get to
practice in front of me I would love
that I know what I may be I can swear
you thank you thank you so much for
being here you are a strong light keep
shining
thank you so much
[Applause]
actually
and the words were just so powerful are
you asking for restitution yes okay I'm
going to order that for you and for all
of those survivors now it's important to
bear on our final victim impact
statement I'm gonna tell the court when
I met this woman about a year ago in my
office in Detroit I knew after meeting
her that we would be here at some point
I didn't expect it would be a plea I
thought it might be a long artist trial
good afternoon her and listening to her
meeting her support of this thing I knew
there was no doubt that she would carry
this case and that the world would hear
her and believed her and that the truth
would be exposed I am so honored to let
you know that the next person you will
hear from is Rachel Denholm
thank you so much for being here
please date me spell your name for the
record Rachel den Hollander our ACH ato
de n H ou Tiger boy sorry I do want to
thank you first the jackal Elena for
giving all of us the chance to reclaim
voices our voices were taken from us for
so long and I am grateful beyond what I
can express that you have given us the
chance to restore Emma there are two
major purposes in our criminal justice
system
Your Honor the pursuit of justice and
the protection of the innocent neither
these purposes can be met if anything
less than the maximum available sentence
under the plea agreement is imposed upon
Larry for his name's not because the
federal sentence he will already serve
is lacking but because the sentence
rendered today will send a message
across this country a message to every
victim and a message to every
perpetrator I realize you have many
factors to consider when you fashion
your sentence but I submit to you that
the preeminent question in this case as
you reach a decision about how best to
satisfy the dual aims of this Court is
the same question that I asked judge
Neff to consider how much is a little
girl worth how much is a young woman
wear Larry is a hardened and determined
sexual predator I know this firsthand
at age 15 when I suffered from chronic
back
Payne Larry sexually assaulted me
repeatedly under the guise of medical
treatment for nearly a year he did with
my own mother in the room carefully and
perfectly obstructing her view so that
she would not know what he was doing his
ability to gain my trust and the trust
of my parents his grooming and carefully
calculated brazen sexual assault was the
result of deliberate premeditated
intentional and methodological patterns
of abuse patterns that were erst long
before I walked through their Ayres exam
room door and which continued to be
perpetrated I believe on a daily basis
for 16 more years until I filed the
police report Larry is the most
dangerous type of abuser one who is
capable of manipulating his victims
through coldly calculated grooming
methodologies presenting the most
wholesome and caring external persona as
a deliberate means to ensure a steady
stream of young children to assault and
while Larry is unlikely to live past his
federal sentence he is not the only
predator out there and this sentence
will send a message about how seriously
abuse will be taken so I ask how much is
a little girl worth how much priority
should be placed on communicating that
the foolish weight of the law will be
used to protect another innocent child
from the soul-shattering devastation
that sexual assault brings I submit to
you that these children are worth
everything worth every protection the
law can offer worth the maximum sentence
the second aim of this corpse and our
criminal justice system is to pursue
justice for the victims that have
already been harmed and this aim too can
only be realized by imposing the maximum
sentence under the plea agreement and in
reaching this decision - we also must
answer the question how much was a
little girl worth how much were these
young women worth this time however the
little girls in question are not
potential victims there are real women
and children real women and little girls
have names and faces and souls real
women and children whose abuse and
suffering was enjoyed for sexual
fulfillment by the defendant I believe
sometimes your honor that when we are
embroiled in a legal dispute the words
of our legal system designed to
categorize and classify and obstruct can
inadvertently sterilize the harsh
realities of what has taken place they
can serve as a shield against the horror
of what we are really discussing and
this must not ever happen because of
truth about what Larry has done must be
realized to its fullest depth if justice
is to ever be served and so in her
moment your honor I like every woman who
is come for you when I take a moment to
drop that shield
Larry meticulously groomed me for the
purpose of exploiting me for his sexual
game he penetrated me he groped me he
fondled me and then he whispered
questions about how it felt he engaged
in fatigue raiding and humiliating sex
acts without my consent or permission
and Larry enjoyed it
Larry sought out and took pleasure in
little girls and women being sexually
injured and violated because he liked it
and as I and so many other women and
little girls were being violated Larry
from sexual satisfaction in our story as
we were being sexually violated even as
very young children as young as six
years old
lain sexually aroused by our humiliation
and our pain he asked us how it felt
because he wanted to know what was done
to myself and these other women and
little girls and the fact that our
sexual violation was enjoyed by Larry
matters it demands justice and the
sentence you imposed today will send
about how much these precious women and
children are worth you have seen her
pictures your honor
moments in time captured when they were
young and vulnerable and violated I
think of the young girl that I was and
the little girls and young women all of
these survivors were everyday I feel
like I see them in the faces of my two
precious daughters when I watched my
daughter's eyes light up as they danced
to the Nutcracker I remember the little
girl that I and all of these women used
to be this Oracle their eyes must have
had as minded before their innocence was
taken
I watched my daughter's love and trust
unreservedly and I remember the wattle
rose that it has been to let myself love
and be loved without fear I think of the
scars that still remain for all of us
one of the worst parts of this entire
process we know and as I've began to
realize what had happened to me how many
other little girls had been left
destroyed too I was barely 15 when larry
began to abuse me and as i lay on the
table each time and tried to reconcile
what was happening with the man larry
was how that to be there were 30 things
I was very sure first it was clear to me
this was something where he did
regularly second because this was
something Larry did regularly it was
impossible that at least some women and
girls had not described what was going
on
- officials at MSU and USAG I was
confident of this and third I was
confident that because people at MSU and
USAG had to be aware of what Larry was
doing and had not stopped him there
could surely be no question about the
legitimacy of his treatment this must be
medical treatment the problem must be me
and because I had friends who were
physical therapists who actually
practise legitimate internal pelvic
floor techniques I also knew at 15 that
to practice this
to specialized training and
certification surely anyone who had
heard that Larry was penetrating little
girls would have demanded to know where
he got his training and if there was any
question he would have never been
allowed near me and so I lay still and
on the first two points I was right it
wasn't think he did often and others had
described
Larry's treatment before in fact though
I didn't know it at the time for girls
and women had described in detail to
three different athletic departments at
MSU what he was doing at his penetration
and their belief that they had been
sexually assaulted it was reported to
Catholic colleges
MSU had gymnastics coach - a track coach
and to multiple athletic trainers and
supervisors years before I walked into
lairs door but I was wrong in my
favorite belief I was wrong that surely
if someone had been made aware of what
Larry was doing they would report it and
ensure it was legitimate before ever
allowing him near another child I did
not know when I was fifteen that in 1997
three years before I walked into Larry's
exam room that M s use had gymnastics
coach Kathy clay Gus had waved a report
form in front of Larisa voice after
being told by two separate gymnasts of
what Larry was doing and told the Rissa
there would be consequences for her if
she reported I did not know that Tiffany
Thomas Lopez had reported the
penetration and sexual assault -
athletic trainer destiny teach in Hawk
and two other athletic trainers and
supervisors two years before I walked
into Larry's door I did not know that
Christie Achenbach had reported the
penetration and sexual assault to her
track coach and her athletic trainers
and had also been silenced a full year
before I walked into Larry stolen
I did not know that Jennifer Bedford had
also reported to destiny teach in Hawk
and asked if she could file a report
that Larry's treatment made her feel
uncomfortable and that she had also been
silenced at 15 I believed that the
adults at MSU surrounding Larry would do
the right thing if they're aware of what
Larry was doing and I was terribly wrong
and discovering that I could not only
trust my abuser but I could not trust
the people surrounding him has been
devastating it is part of the
consequences of sexual assault and it
needs to be taken seriously I did not
know that at the same time Larry was
penetrating me USAG was systematically
varying reports of sexual assault
against member coaches in a file cabinet
instead of reporting them creating a
culture where predators like Larry and
so many others in the organization up to
the highest level coaches were able to
sexually abuse children including our
Olympians without any fear of being
caught I did not know that contrary to
my belief the elite gymnasts whose
pictures were plastered on Larry's wall
were far from protected that USAG rather
than supervising Larry was allowing him
to treat these girls in their own beds
without even having a medical license in
Texas I did not have any of these things
and so as Larry was abusing me each time
I assured myself it must be fine because
I thought I could trust the adults
around me my misplaced trust in my
physician and my misplaced trust in the
adults around me who wielded like a
weapon and it cost me dearly and it
follows me everywhere and I would like
to take a moment now to address both
organizations whose failures led to my
sexual assault because it is part of the
consequences that I now carry you may
thank you MSU we have been telling our
stories for more than 18 months and you
have yet to answer a single question I
have asked every time I repeat these
facts about the number of women who
report it to employees at MSU
and we're silenced do respond the exact
same way you issue a press statement
saying there is no cover-up because nope
who heard the reports of assault
believed that Larry was committing abuse
you play word games saying you didn't
know because no one believed I know that
and the reason everyone who heard about
Larry's abuse did not believe it is
because they did not listen they did not
listen in 1997 or 1998 or 1999 or 2000
or 2004 or 2014 no one knew according to
your definition of know because no one
handled the reports of abuse properly
victims were silenced intimidated
repeatedly told it was medical treatment
and even forced to go back for continued
sexual assault we have stated in the
motion to dismiss our civil suit that
ironically is being heard right now in
court as I am speaking that the reports
that were given in 1997 98 99 and 2002
track coaches had gymnastics coaches and
athletic trainers and supervisors don't
quote count as notice because these
teenagers didn't report it to the right
official the 14 year old didn't go to
the right person you have stated that no
reports of sexual assault count as
notice unless that is reported to a
person who is capable of firing the
alleged perpetrator this entirely
contradicts the letter that president
Simon sent all 11,000 MSU employees in
2012 reminding them that MSU policy
requires them to report any suspected
child abuse and any allegations of
sexual assault against someone at MSU so
MSU which is it dear employees have a
duty to protect children or not it has
been 18 months and I am still asking the
same questions hoping that the little
girls that come after me will have
adults that they can trust and I've been
getting the same answer for a year and
so I am asking Point Blank again when
Kathy Kaylor just humiliated
larysa voice and ii gymnasts greatly
compounding the trauma of their sexual
assault and waved the report form in
front of her telling her there would be
consequences as she reported is this the
right way or the wrong way to handle
sexual assault allegations on MSU campus
when Tiffany Thomas Loeb has reported
her abuse to athletic trainers and
supervisors and the trainer's use the
emotional pain Tiffany was in after her
father's death to convince her would be
too exhausting and painful to Bob filing
a report was it the right way or the
wrong way to handle a report of sexual
assault on MSU campus when Christie
Achenbach reported the sexual assault of
her track coach and athletic trainers
and was also silenced was it the right
way or the wrong way to handle a report
a sexual assault on MSU's campus when
Kyle Stephens parents reported Larry's
sexual abuse of their daughter to a
dependency psychiatrist and he brought
Marian to talk to her parents instead of
reporting as he was mandated to do by
law was it the right way or the wrong
way to handle a report of sexual assault
on MSU campus when Amanda Thomas Shaw
recorded - the title nine office and
Larry was allowed to hand pick the four
colleagues to the interview to determine
whether his treatment was legitimate was
that the right way or the wrong way to
investigate a claim of sexual assault on
MSC's campus and after all this what I
came forward in 2016
I brought an entire file of evidence
with me
I made a police report and a title 9
report and I brought with me - those
reports my medical records showing that
Larry had never charted penetrative
techniques
I brought medical records parameters
practitioner documenting my grafic
disclosure of abused - her way back in
2004 I had my journals showing the
mental anguish I had been in since the
assault a catalogue of national and
international medical journal articles
showing what real pelvic floor treatment
looks like I brought a letter from the
neighboring district attorney vouching
for my character and truthfulness and
urging detectives to take my case
seriously
I brought a cover letter going point by
point through Michigan law
case law explaining how every element of
first-degree criminal sexual assault was
met and could be proven
I brought a witness I had disclosed
tattoo in 2004 I brought evidence of two
more women unconnected to me who were
also claiming sexual assault and I had
the names of three pelvic floor experts
willing to speak on my behalf and the
MSU PD handled it beautifully but MSU
officials were a different story because
the response of Dean Williams tramble
was to send an email to Larry that day
and tell him quote good luck I am on
your side and when my video testimony to
the indie star came out graphically
describing the abuse that Larry
perpetrated disclosing horrific details
to the world that no one was ever
supposed to know that I had never told
anyone even my own husband until that
point destroyable forwarded that video
testimony to the msu provost and he
locked it he called it the cherry on the
cake of his day president Simon and
Board of Trustees is this the right way
to handle disclosures of abuse on FSU's
campus when Brooke lemon one of the
doctors Larry was allowed to hand pick
to clear himself in 2014 was interviewed
for my investigation she's I hadn't
really been penetrated I only thought I
had because quote when I am a
fifteen-year-old girl I think everything
between my legs is my vagina I only
thought Larry had put his fingers in me
for up to 40 minutes at a time for a
full year I was just confused sounds
eerily familiar to what Amanda Thomas
Shaw was told in 2014 that she quote
didn't understand the nuanced
differences between sexual assault and a
medical exam it sounds eerily familiar
to what every single woman was told all
the way back to 1997
we were all wrong we were all just
two used Board of Trustees is this the
right way to handle disclosures of
sexual assault on LSU's campus and if
that were not bad enough when I finally
joined the civil suit five months later
after waiting for almost half a year for
MSU to do the right thing the Vice
President of the Board of Trustees Joel
Ferguson went on television and gave a
press interview in which he claimed
those of us who had filed civil suit
were ambulance chasers who were looking
for a payday in fact I know that at
least one other high-ranking MSU
official has specifically called me out
by name and said I am in it for the
money this has never been contradicted
retracted or refuted and MSU you need to
realize that you are greatly compounding
the damage done to these abuse victims
by the way you are responding this what
it took to get here what we had to go
through for our voices to be heard
because of the responses of the adults
in authority has greatly compounded the
damage we suffer and it matters we have
waited 18 months to be told no this is
not how we handle this on MSU campus but
instead everyone has doubled down on the
claim that nothing was done wrong and
the only conclusion that can be reached
is that no one truly sees anything wrong
with any of this and that is terrifying
and it leaves me terrified for the
little girls of the future who we are
here to protect and because of this
woefully ignorant victim silencing and
mishandling of sexual assault reports
against Larry in 97 98 and 99 I watched
their Larry storm in 2000 I never walked
out the same not long after I stopped
seeing Larry I transitioned from athlete
to coach and every day that I natured
those baby gymnast I wondered if any of
them would find their way into his exam
room when one of my little girls was
finally referred to him
chants and I spoke up and I was kindly
cautioned for my own sake to remain
silent
my little baby James to accept to marry
before I even knew a decision had been
made to do so her family moved away
almost immediately thereafter and I wept
for that little girl and I prayed to God
that she was under the age range that
Larry preferred she was 7 but when I
filed my police report kind of Stephens
came forward she was 6 a year younger
than my little girl and I cried in my
kitchen and I don't know yet if that
little girl walked out to see him as she
walked I transitioned from coaching to
working in public policy and I fought
the air every time I had to commute or
work in close quarters with my male
colleagues I dreaded working on current
events or legislation that involves
sexual assault because I knew the
memories that would come with it I still
watched gymnastics but I looked away
whenever the camera panned to the
sidelines in case Larry would be there
I wondered almost daily if there was any
chance that my voice would ever be hurt
I began law school when I was 19 and I
wrapped up in blankets
every time I studied torts or crimes
related to sexual assault and I hoped my
face wouldn't betray me in classroom
discussions and I researched internal
pelvic floor procedures and I tried to
find out what had happened to me and I
watched for any sign that I would ever
be believed I met my future husband and
I told him what I never wanted to tell
anyone and I wondered if you would walk
away and he didn't but I couldn't even
hold his hand or look up at him because
closeness wasn't safe and Trust wasn't
safe we got married and my 25th birthday
came and went and I sat up 4 nights
before believing my ability to file a
police report would end on that birthday
I didn't know the statute of limitations
had been lifted I woke up the morning I
turned 25 and instead of being able to
feel joy at a milestone
I felt only hopeless it was everything
because I thought my chance to stop this
man
was over I thought daily about all the
little women and girls walking in his
office and I wondered if it would ever
end I became a mother three times over
and the fear that hung over each birth
knowing I would be vulnerable in a
medical setting cast a horrific say over
what should have been an occasion of
pure joy and I watched for a chance to
be believed and I waited I held my
firstborn and then my two daughters
date-time I did Larry I remember the day
you brought Caroline into your office so
that I could hold her you knew how much
I loved children and you used your own
daughter to manipulate me and every time
I held my babies I prayed to God you
would leave your abuse in the exam room
and not take it home to the little girl
born with black hair just like her daddy
and then the indie star story came out
about the rampant cover-up of sexual
abuse at USAG and I knew this was the
chance and I wrote them immediately but
because of when they redid the cost of
making it end has been incredibly high
and the effects of Larry's abuse has
been redundant in the effort that it
took to stop him choosing to live those
moments over and over daily releasing
every shred of privacy I had living with
the reality that I not only didn't get
to choose what you did but now I didn't
get to choose who knew about it even my
status as a sexual assault victim has
impacted or did impact my ability to
advocate for sexual assault victims
because of once it became known that I
too had experienced sexual assault
people close to me used it as an excuse
to brush off my concerns when I
advocated for others who had been abused
saying I was just obsessed because of
what I had gone through that I was
imposing my own experience upon other
institutions who had massive failures
and much worse my advocacy for sexual
assault victims something I cherished
cost me my church and our closest
friends three weeks before I filed my
report I was left alone and isolated and
far worse it was impacted because when I
came out my sexual assault was wielded
like a weapon against me often by those
who should have been the first to
support and help and I couldn't even do
what I loved best which was to reach out
to others I was subjected to lies and
attacks on my character including very
publicly by attorney Shannon Smith when
I testified under oath I was being
attacked for wanting fame and attention
for making up a story to try to get
money and Your Honor since these attacks
were made on my character very publicly
on public record I would like to take an
opportunity briefly now to correct them
you may proceed thank you out of the two
women in question that day Miss Smith
and I who were attempting to communicate
their either questions or answers I
would like to note that only one of us
was taking pictures of the courtroom on
her cell phone only one of us posed for
the press and said quote I feel like I
should say cheese
and out of the two of us only one of us
was making money off her court
appearance that day I don't feel they
need to say anything else I think I've
communicated like your honor I'm sorry
again I have to object
inside there all we need everybody to
calm down counselor I've heard you she's
not gonna say anything else this is her
time to speak you are going to get your
opportunity and you can counter what you
need to we're going to sit down and you
may proceed min thank you the cost
emotional and physical to see this fear
has been greater than many will ever
know and Larry I don't need to tell you
what the cost of your abuse has been to
me because you got to read my journals
every word of them because those had to
go into evidence to make this happen but
I want you to understand why I made this
choice knowing full well who is going to
cost together and with very little hope
of ever succeeding I did it because it
was right no matter the cost
it was right and the farthest I can run
from what you have become is to daily
choose what is right instead of what I
want you have become a man ruled by
selfish and perverted desires a man
defined by his daily choices over and
over again to feed that selfishness and
perversion you chose to pursue your
wickedness no matter what it cost others
and the opposite of what you have done
is for me to choose to love
sacrificially no matter what it costs me
in our early hearings you brought your
Bible into the courtroom and you have
spoken of praying for forgiveness and so
it is on that basis that I appeal to you
if you have read the Bible you carry you
know that the definition of sacrificial
love portrayed is of God himself loving
so sacrificially that he gave up
everything to pay a penalty for the same
who did not commit by His grace I - t so
much this way
he's building train for forgiveness but
maybe he'll read the Bible you carry you
know forgiveness does not come from
doing good things as if good deeds can
erase what you have done
it comes from repentance which requires
facing and acknowledging the truth about
what you have done in all of its utter
depravity and horror without mitigation
without excuse we're not acting as the
good deeds can erase what you have seen
in this courtroom today the Bible you
carry says it is better for a millstone
to be thrown around your neck and you've
thrown into a lake than me to make even
one child stumble and you have damaged
hundreds the Bible used to be carries a
final judgment where all of God's wrath
and his eternal terror is poured out on
men like you should you ever reach the
point of truly facing what you have done
the guilt will be crushing and that is
what makes the gospel of Christ is our
sweet because it extends grace and hope
and mercy where none should be found and
it will be there for you I pray you
experience this little crushing weight
of guilt so that you may someday
experience true repentance and true
forgiveness from God which you need far
more than forgiveness with me though I
extend that to you as well throughout
this process I have clung to a quote by
CS Lewis where he says my argument
against God was that the universe seemed
so cruel and unjust but how had I got
this idea of unjust and just a man does
not call a line crooked unless he first
has some idea of straight what was i
comparing the universe to when I called
it up just Larry I can call what you did
evil and wicked because it was and I
know it was evil and wicked because the
straight line exists there straight line
is not measured based on your perception
or anyone else's perception and this
means I can speak the truth about my
abuse without minimization or mitigation
and I can call it evil because I know
what goodness is and this is why I pity
you because when a person loses the
ability to define good and evil when
they cannot define evil they can no
longer define and enjoy what is truly
good when a person can harm another
human being especially a child without
true guilt they have lost the ability to
truly love Larry you have shut yourself
off from every truly beautiful and good
thing in this world that could have and
should have brought you joy and
fulfillment and I pity you for it
you could have had everything you
pretended to be every woman who stood up
here truly loved you as an innocent
child
real genuine love for you and it did not
satisfy I have experienced the soul
satisfying joy of a marriage built on
sacrificial love and safety and
tenderness and care I have experienced a
true intimacy in its deepest Joy's and
it is beautiful and secret and glorious
and that is a joy you have cut yourself
off from ever experiencing and I pity
you for it I have been there for young
gymnasts and help them transform from
awkward little girls to graceful
beautiful confident athletes and take in
joy in their success because I wanted
what was best for them and this is a joy
you have cut yourself off from forever
because your desire to help was nothing
more than it was
your desire to harm I have lived the
deep satisfaction of wrapping my small
children up in my arms and making them
feel safe and secure because I was safe
and this is a rich joy beyond what I can
express and you have cut yourself off
from it
because you were not safe but I pity you
for that in losing the ability to call
evil what it is without medication
without minimization you have lost the
ability to define and enjoy love and
goodness you have fashioned for yourself
a prison medicine far far worse than any
I could ever put you in and I pity you
for that and this is also why in many
ways your honor the worst part of this
process was each name each number who
came forward to the police with each
Jane Doe I saw my little girls and the
little girls that were the little girls
who walked into Larry's office that I
could not save because no one wanted to
listen and while that is not my guilt it
is pain I still carry and pain I share
with them I pray them and with every
tear that fell I wondered who was gonna
find these little girls who's gonna tell
them how much they are worth how
valuable they are how deserving of
justice and protection who is gonna tell
these little girls that what was done to
them matters that they're seen and
valued that they are not alone and they
are not unprotected but I could not do
that but we are hearing now and today
that message can be sent with this
sentence in your hand down you can
communicate to all these little girls
and to every predator to every little
girl a young woman who is watching oh
much a little girl it's worth I am
asking that we leave this corner and we
leave knowing that when Mary was
sexually aroused and
/ our violation when he enjoyed our
suffering when he took pleasure in our
abuse that was evil and wrong I asked
that you hand on a sentence that tells
us that what was done to us matters that
we are though we are worth everything
when the greatest protection the law can
offer the greatest measure of justice
available and to everyone who is
watching I asked that same question how
much is a little girl worth Larry said
in court that he hoped education and
learning would happen from this tragedy
and I share that hope and this is what
we need to learn look around the
courtroom remember what you have
witnessed these past seven days this is
what it looks like when someone chooses
to put their selfish desires
above the safety and love for those
around them and let it be a warning to
us fall and moving forward as a society
this is what it looks like when the
adults in authority do not respond
properly to disclosures of sexual
assault this is what it looks like when
institutions create a culture where a
predator can flourish unafraid and
unabated and this is what it looks like
when people in authority refuse to
listen put friendships in front of the
truth failed to create or enforce proper
policy and failed to hold enablers
accountable this is what it looks like
it looks like a courtroom full of
survivors who carried deep wounds women
and girls who have banded together to
fight for themselves because no one else
would do it women and girls who carry
scars that will never fully heal but who
have made the choice to place the guilt
and shame on the only person to whom it
belongs the abuser but may the horror
expressed in this courtroom over the
last seven days
be motivation for anyone and everyone no
matter the context to take
responsibility if they have erred in
protecting a child to understand the
incredible failures that led to this
week and to do it better the next time
ja ja Kalina I plead with you as you
deliberate the sentence to give Larry
send a message that these victims are
worth everything in order to meet both
the goals of this Court
I plead with you to impose the maximum
sentence under the plea agreement
because everything is what these
survivors are worth thank you thank you
are you asking for restitution you know
me I'm gonna leave it over to anyway you
might find that if it's available you
don't need the money you have another
pocket to fill someone else
sister survivor might be able to use it
I don't know but it is your money and it
is yours right so I will leave it open
they don't have to use it I want you to
know that your words and the right words
do do you just build a file you built an
army of survivors and you are five star
child
your demands for accountability of
change are happening your words your
army tell us the world for these girls
on you and all the others who've you
mentioned who I've mentioned to I think
every survivors mentioned the concern
for all of those other ones who have a
future but they're worth something that
they have a voice you're a shining
example your words have Grace and great
hope for a better future in the world
women survivors as you know sadly not
just limited to women or children female
also now you're in control now and I
think you also know that sexual assault
is about control I don't even know if he
knew what he was enjoying because it was
about control of all of you and none of
you are being controlled any more you've
found your voice and we found a world of
support he will lose his voice his
freedom his ability to move how much is
the little girl worth it in my answered
that question I have to violate the law
and I won't appreciate that
I think you all in the media movement
need to put lines above that I have a
name I have a voice I matter and why
because all of you have come forward as
sister survivors but why more than that
because you started the tidal wave you
made all of this County you made all of
these voices matter your sister
survivors and I thank you you are the
bravest person I haven't ever had in my
courtroom
[Applause]
the next part of this process I think I
counted 168 voices that I've heard them
I know your number is a little bit less
what's your number I have 100 and does
this now include everyone this include
this concludes yes but ready - victim
impact statements yes okay how do we
proceed next is we have to make a
correction on the number of jail days in
the pre-sentence investigation report
the people have their opportunity to
speak then defense counsel then
defendant if you chooses and then I will
speak and sentence before all of that
happens we are going to take 15 minutes
unless you'd like to speak now but I
think it's better after the break I
would like to break thank you I thought
so thank you all right
[Music]
you
okay
right
[Music]
thank you you may be seated
at this time we're back on the record at
this time Council we need to update the
pre-sentence investigation report I
spoke with you in chambers and I made
following changes I don't think in the
jack into it but on the cover page of
the pre-sentence investigation report
I changed counts 1 2 5 8 10 and 18 to
369 days credit and count 24 to 370 days
to credit is that correct it is I've
also changed that on the second page and
have also changed those days in the
basic information sheet I don't know I
you know what I didn't look at the
evaluation and plan but if it's in there
I will change that as well but yes it is
so I'm in the recommendation on page 3
and changing the 361 to 369
and then 362 days to 370
are there any other Corrections
additions deletions at this time not
only half the people the last individual
that I need to come up here probably
answer the last individual that spoke
referenced my clients daughter by name
I'm just gonna ask that the court seal
that page of the transcript I spoke with
the attorney general's office about that
and I don't think that they have a
problem with the absorption okay
again as to any of these little blips
we've had and how to surprise over so
many pages of testimony in seven days I
don't think there's a rule to strike it
officially from it the transcript but we
will feel that pain over that word or
maybe we can costume is Hamlin about
putting that name or the full name in
the other situations that single name
and one of the single shoots so nothing
else is lost you a transcript I don't
know there might be ways to do it to get
around the rules we'll figure that out
so we maintain this the structure of the
transcript without violating any rules
and protect those we need to that
acceptable
yes your honor thank you okay at this
time then I'm half of the people what
would you like me to know here before I
begin I do want to put it on the record
that obviously you've heard from 156
victims or we have read their statement
you have been presented in the
four inch binder in front of you with at
least I believe by our count about two
dozen additional victim impact
statements some survivors who wish to
submit those directly to the court I
know you can do those and I just wanted
a place with on the record as well thank
you I do have them my law clerk has
diligently placed them in this binder
they're in some kind of order and I also
will be adding to that for my vertical
my own notes of what I've highlighted
and of course this Hanlon has the
records thank you your honor on behalf
of the Michigan Department of the
Attorney General the investigation
prosecution team I do have some things I
would like to say you may proceed thank
the breath and ripple of this defendants
abuse and destruction is nearly infinite
its centers in the Lansing and Michigan
State University communities it spans
the state of Michigan and reaches Club
and elite training gyms collegiate
athletics and even the United States and
International Olympic communities and
it's not even limited to gymnastics as
athletes from over a dozen different
sports have reported abuse his practiced
and perfected abuse spanned over 25
years and included countless victims the
beginning before he was even a doctor
one who travelled the world seeking gold
but we know his access to children and
young women and his abuse did not end
until an investigative news report and
one brave woman came public to stop him
the basic facts of his assaults have
been recounted by the charged victims in
this case as well as numerous victims
who gave their impact statements the
fact that the defendant admitted to Your
Honor under oath that he penetrated
these young girls vaginas and anuses
with his bare hands not for any medical
purpose but for his own sexual pleasure
he had erections as he performed these
so-called treatments
he asked 11-year olds to tell them tell
him if they were on their periods so he
could be sure that they were ripe for
his abuse children that were pubescent
often unaware of their bodies children
whose parents sat feet away near
children but the assault he perpetrated
on these trusting young girls was not
limited to the hours and hours and hours
of sexual penetration the defendant is a
twisted beloved renowned doctor who used
his prestige to gain trust of these
girls to exploit them leaving many of
them emotionally shattered used by a man
that they not only trusted but also
loved he supposedly practiced
osteopathic manipulative medicine but in
truth he was simply a master manipulator
he manipulated victims and parents he
manipulated his community through the
press and social media early in this
case he tried to manipulate the police
department in his interviews he tried to
manipulate prior investigators he even
tried to manipulate Your Honor in this
court through his pathetic letter all
while knowing the truth that he did the
things he was accused of doing any
competitive gymnastics he found a
perfect place for this master
manipulation in gymnastics young girls
do what they're told they hide their
pain they hide their injuries these
young girls are bared there to all of it
their bodies were constantly on display
in under scrutiny
it takes some kind of sick perverted
perfect perversion to not only assault a
child but to do so with her parent in
the room to do so while a lineup of
eager young June
waited at twists starts to see the
gymnastics God Larry NASA it's a sick
perversion
when a defendant's close family friends
were upstairs in his own home while he
abused young Kyle students just six
years old when it began his own wife and
children sat upstairs for years while he
gave his basement treatment to
unnecessarily and without warning
penetrate an unsuspecting miner for your
own selfish sexual gains while her
parent sat just feet away unknowing had
to be part of the rush or the thrill for
this defendant but the thrill that he
might just get caught but he was a
master he had developed a built-in
defense no coach should be in a shower
with a boy no priest has an excuse for
any type of sexual touching but Nasser
perfected a built-in excuse and defense
he was a doctor and a good one so the
world thought and this makes up the
other half of his scheme the trust he
could garner from being not only a
doctor a respected professional but an
Olympic doctor one who treated these
young girls these young victims heroes
he adorned his office with pictures of
Olympians he treated with the far-off
places he supposed his supposed
expertise took him he brought down
tokens for his precious victims galley
off from competitions around the world
and in doing so he made each of his
victims feel special as Cassie Powell
said the defendant hid behind Olympic
rings and Spartan green and white for
many of these girls Nasser was not just
a daughter but a confidante a role model
sometimes the only affirming male
influence in their lives the level of
Nasser's predation reaches even
higher because he often knew the victims
parents some of whom were fellow doctors
others who unwittingly sent patients to
him he even knew that some of the
parents were police officers he was so
well practiced in his abuse and
continually empowering himself that he
believed he'd get away with it despite
any parents profession please he
believed he was untouchable this
defendant not only robbed these children
of their innocence he robbed many of
them of their good health
he performed no healing only hurt
with so many heartbreaking stories of
unnecessary treatments misdiagnosis
inaccurate medical treatment which we
know has resulted in lasting permanent
damage
many of these survivors wonder whether
third now lifelong injuries could have
been treated
had he not wanted the continued access
to their young bodies he wasn't a
world-renowned doctor as one of our
experts so eloquently put it in
preparing this case of trial he was
performing hocus pocus medicine over the
last 16 months as I have prepared this
case and lived this case and thrown my
heart and soul into this case I have
often wondered did he really think he
was going to get away with this abusing
so many for so many years over two
decades so many sports no patient no
child was safe and yet he also have used
some of our most prominent national
heroes maybe he did think he could beat
the odds and you know what for years
he did what that did that beating of the
odds - Kyle Stephens
- Jessica Thomas show - Madeline Jones -
Kaylie lorentz tip Ailey London -
victims D in
gee and I to Rachael den Hollander
history ate him guidance for the future
future every previous time there been an
allegation nothing happened his lies
worked this Court heard from several
women some decades later who were
initially determined to be confused or
to be liars he was believed believed
over these children larisa boys
Tiffany Thomas Brianne Randall
Amanda Thomas show sometimes four
fourteen and twenty years have passed
since those brave women told someone you
saw and heard first Trant hand to know
your truth to be called a liar by not
only your abuser but to also not be
believed by other trusting adults what
does that do to a person adults who were
supposed to protect you and could have
made it stop and could have prevented
others from the same fate what does it
do to a child we saw firsthand what it
does and with each time he got away he
was empowered to continue and perfect
and it butan more it should not take
finding a collection of 37,000 vile and
discussing images to believe these women
and girls it shouldn't take
investigative journalists to expose
predators it should not take one brave
woman put in the unenviable position and
choice to go public with her name and be
the only public person for months but
thank God we have these journalists and
if they expose this truth and that they
continue to cover this story
thank God Rachel den Haller made that
first contact with the reporter and
decided to allow them to publish her
name how many times have we heard that
without those stories and Rachel
victims would not have reported they
would not be here to speak this week to
expose what truly happened all these
years behind those doors and under that
towel we have all learned a few lessons
from this case and these past seven days
of powerful test testimony as I reflect
back an entire semester of a college
class in sexual abuse grooming behaviors
wide victims delay and predatory
behavior has played out these past week
and a half but as we look back on this
case in the last seven days I'm struck
by a number of observations what does it
say about our society that victims of
sexual abuse have to hide their pain for
years when they did nothing wrong what
does it say about our society when
victims do come forward and they are
automatically met with skepticism and
doubt treated as liars until proven
truth what do we take away from this
these have been important narratives to
hear and witness and listen to they will
be the words that burn down cultural
stereotypes and cultural myths and I
have a few takeaways and lessons I hope
anyone watching these past seven days
has learned and will take away with them
the first is that we must start by
believing other adults must start by
believing with children and young people
report abuse regardless of who the
perpetrator is no matter his education
his position the respect he commands or
the awards and adorations he has
received
research shows that false allegations
are slim that most perpetrators are
serial offenders and that how a victim
especially a child is treated when they
disclose if they are believed and
supported and not lain can affect their
well-being for years can support better
outcomes within the criminal justice
system and can protect other victims yet
even after the first day and the
conclusion of the first week it was
brought to my attention by many involved
in this case that there are still people
in this very community an hour I imagine
who saying that these women were all in
it for the money
or the attention are you kidding me
after a hundred and fifty
heart-wrenching raw graphic visceral
impact statements how can anyone still
believe that even to this day even as
this historic sentencing hearing is
broadcast around the globe there are
still likely people who know perhaps
those 2,000 folks who voted for this
defendant a school board member perhaps
the many petitioning riders we are aware
of who included doctors and trainers and
athletes and lawyers who spared nothing
to come to the defense of this defendant
over 16 months ago and continued to
defend him for months even after he had
been charged with Kyle Stephens abuse I
hope and pray that they're watching that
they're listening and that they have
learned their lesson the second lesson I
take away and I hope others do is that
anyone can be a perpetrator anyone can
be a serial sexual abuser this defendant
stole cheated and lied he stole these
victims in
since he lied about his behavior and he
cheated parents and the community in the
world of the trust they held in doctors
prominent physicians and prominent
community members experts teach on this
issue
Russell strand a retired Army criminal
investigator teachers on teachers on
offender dynamics and behavior strand
talks about how abusers have three
personas the first is the public one for
all to see the skint is the uninhabited
persona what you only let others close
to you see and we all have those two
personas but the third persona is the
hidden and secret one it's hidden in the
mind and the eyes and the beliefs of the
perpetrator and that persona is often
hidden well serial child molesters hide
among us we know that this defendant had
a good persona a good public persona at
least he was the good guy the goofy guy
the Olympic doctor the Medical School
professor the gymnastics God he was a
religious and pious man a father a
husband a friend a school board
candidate a man of honor and passion so
kind and giving and always approachable
he never charged for his services and he
saw patients basically anywhere but we
know without a doubt after the seven
days what we on this team had known for
16 months that Nasser's third hidden
persona just as strand discusses that he
is possibly the most prolific serial
child sexual abuser in history a selfish
child molester who spared no one Nasser
hid behind that outer facade that is
different and faked and not real but
that people believed his were real
people came to his defense they believed
that they were the man that he wanted
them to see and not the monster hiding
the name
society our response cannot be that he
couldn't do this or that
I knew his character I knew he wasn't
capable this kind of crime it's because
no one wants to see it the only person
who sees this side are his victims then
the perpetrator goes back shows only
what he wants the world to see this is
how he got away with this for so long
and got people to believe him over the
many many many victims are reported
anyone can be an abuser the third
takeaway from this week is that delayed
disclosure of child sexual abuse is not
unique in fact it's quite the norm kids
don't report sexual abuse right away
either because the abuser is a trusted
adult especially when it's a doctor
especially when they are so young and
have no sexual experience to understand
what is wrong the third fourth takeaway
is the Predators groomed their victims
and families this is so confusing to so
many women he was so nice
he gave him presents and trinkets and
desserts
he broke wolves for them especially we
contrast his behavior and relationship
to the harsh and cruel and abusive
coaches that these girls were exposed to
he was only doing that to gain their
trust to confuse them and get what he
wanted the fourth takeaway is we must
teach our girls and boys to speak up
kids are told to be respectful of adults
girls and boys don't speak up it is
easier to put up with discuss discomfort
than cause waves and when they are eh
nothing happens we teach our girls and
daughters to be too nice to just ignore
and put up with uncomfortable situations
to stay silent and they should be
allowed to be heard and we need to keep
teach them to continue to speak up until
someone
and helps the sticks takeaway from this
week and a half is that police and
prosecutors must take on hard cases
regardless of who the offender is they
cannot shy away from tough cases because
of who the offender is or his position
in the community they cannot victim
blame or wait until they have a perfect
case they cannot wait until they have
dozens of victims who have come forward
police and prosecutors must also start
by believing the victims center and
offender focused in the work the final
takeaway is that we as a society need
investigative journalists more than ever
what finally started this reckoning and
ended this decades-long cycle of abuse
was investigative reporting without that
first Indianapolis Star story in August
of 2016
without the story will regional came
forward publicly shortly thereafter he
would still be practicing medicine
treating athletes and abusing kits let
that sink in for a minute right now he
would be at his office on Hagedorn and
Hannah not far from this courtroom in
the Michigan State University campus
abusing children had it not been for the
investigative reporters and Rachael who
processes we know federal law
enforcement did not stop him nor did
trainers or coaches or Dean's or medical
supervisors victim disclosures to adults
didn't stop him
reporters began the story an excellent
victim centered offender focused police
and prosecutors grabbed at the time and
brought us here today
I am proud of the work of the Michigan
State University Police Department and
our team at the attorney general's
office there is no more supportive
police chief in this country than
chiefdom Jim Dunlap and our victims and
the public are incredibly lucky to have
their case investigated but arguably the
best sex crimes detective in the country
and her team detected lieutenant Andrea
Munford is not only a smart dedicated
hard-working investigator but she is
also empathetic and compassionate a
victims are also lucky to have the full
and unwavering support of the Michigan
Attorney General Bill Schuette II who
from day one of taking on this case has
supported this prosecution for me our
team is so proud of these young women
for speaking so many have shared their
story and name and face and they should
feel no shame because they did nothing
wrong he did it's worth remembering once
again that it was one woman who came
public first and when she did she was
ridiculed folks rally behind him they
try to discredit her they signed
petitions in support of him they
believed him over her because of who he
was purported to be people continue to
support him in this very community and
believe him after we charged Kyle
Stephens case after he faced multiple
counts of criminal sexual conduct first
against a minor they chose to believe
his lies over the words of a young woman
who had nothing to gain by coming
forward nothing some of his support
wavered after he was charged with
possessing
tens of thousands of images of child
pornography yet still there were people
in power who had ideas he was framed and
the images were planted
who was who was telling other victims
this as they knew their truth at the
same time that these folks were
supporting him and putting out those
false narratives these women and
countless more you haven't met and who
may be watching and reading knew their
truth they knew he had abused him and
they watched him continue to lie about
committing that abuse it has not been an
easy process for these victims
especially Rachel all alone publicly for
many many months to be accused of being
a Pied Piper of sorts in court in the
press to be accused of somehow planting
this idea of victimhood in other women's
minds the gripping testimony these past
two weeks have shown how absurd those
arguments are you have seen firsthand
the effects this abuse has had on these
women that is tangible physical evidence
that this happened that these women were
abused not bandwagon jumpers not money
grabbers women and girls who were abused
for victims to realize years and decades
later that they were in fact abused
sometimes hundreds of times when they
really thought they were receiving women
treatment it shifts equilibrium it
shatters their sense of the world their
sense of safety their conception of
trust it has caused them to question
what they believe and know and that has
lasting consequences unlike any other
crime that comes before you jo-jo Kulina
sexual abuse and is all so deeply
affects in alters victims lives it seeps
and oozes and permeates into every whore
and crevice of a victim's life it can
alter their life's trajectory we've seen
that time and time again this week when
we've heard mention of depression in
anxiety and panic attacks suicidal
thoughts
medication self-harm question of
southwards and even when we heard from
Donna Markman some seven days ago about
the suicide of Chelsea Nasser sentence
these little girls and little other
little girls two lives imprisoned by
fear and doubt the courage it takes to
overcome so many little obstacles to try
and write your world and just live
normal daily life again is immeasurable
they had to overcome these obstacles on
a daily basis for the rest of their
lives his sexual abuse turned their
world upside down and inside out but
this process of support in this
courtroom in the community helps bring
healing Your Honor I wholeheartedly want
to thank you and your staff for
graciously allowing each fifty to be
heard when we fashioned a sentence
agreement allowing for reported victims
to speak which at that point was in the
neighborhood of a hundred and twenty the
victims survivors we wanted all to feel
involved in this process and to have
their voice heard what we have witnessed
here in this courtroom exceeded even my
wildest dream what we have witnessed
here is unprecedented but hopefully not
the last time that victims will be heard
in this manner the compassion and
empathy that you have shown these women
the support and encouraging words you
have given each one coupled with what I
know is the belief that they and their
stories matter will be remembered by all
long after this case is over
over 150 women had courage to walk into
this courtroom most to be publicly
identified and added to the world as a
nasser victim for the first time yet
they have a Grace and the courage to
speak their truth and become survivors
to each survivor thank you thank you for
coming forward for trusting us for doing
what is so hard and difficult especially
when you report it to the police
especially to those involved in our Rd
cases and especially to those who have
had to testify in court on behalf of the
entire Attorney General and Michigan
State University Police Department team
we believe you and always have we thank
you we are proud to stand up for and
with you and you are our heroes we have
seen the worst of humanity and the best
in these past few days the pain and
destruction caused by evil selfish
takers like this defendant but we have
also seen how one voice can start a
movement
how reckoning can deliver justice how a
community can support and empower and
start healing during these last seven
days on our screen you have seen
countless young innocent faces that was
under this every day at this podium that
I stand you saw strong brave fierce
survivors come here but that's not who
Larry Nasser saw he was attracted and
abused to those young girls in those
pictures but your honor what you did not
see are the sweet young innocent faces
of girls who have been spared a similar
fate because these brave women all spoke
up and more importantly never give up
there is no doubt he would have
continued to he was unabated for the
rest of his life I tell these survivors
to be proud of what you have
accomplished because you are survivors
you have references the army of
survivors that this proceeding and his
abuse has created this house weekend at
women's marches around the country signs
with Kyle Stevens quote someone that the
world did not even know was affiliated
with this case some five days before
those quotes were raised on signs little
girls don't stay little feather they
tune into strong women who have come
back to destroy your world you heard
from Jennifer Rude Bedford and she
concluded by saying stand for truth
resolve for change be committed at this
particular moment in history this
sentencing hearing will be viewed as a
turning point in how our community our
state our nation our culture looks at
sexual abuse this courtroom in the
Ingham County Circuit Court was where
the shame that many survivors felt was
exercised from them and put where it
belongs right on him when each survivor
came forward and shared their name told
their truth supporting each other that
shift brew the world has witnessed what
happens when victims are treated with
respect dignity and that the compassion
and are truly supported by police
prosecutors and the criminal justice
system in courts
what is obvious is that a strong group
of determined women can in fact changed
the wit world and will the fact that the
women led the investigation the
prosecution team and that three female
judges now sentenced defendant Nasir is
poetic justice as I reflect on the last
seven days of the sentencing hearing it
become it became clear that each day
more women and girls word power it was
evidenced by our growing number people
that were reaching out to us to come to
speak their truth these women and girls
have transformed themselves before our
very eyes from victim to survivor to
champion for justice and advocates for
change in all of this on the world
outside will carry on but I want to
recenter you and this court and all
involved back on the reason we're here
the sentencing of defendant Larry Nasser
for his admitted conduct against too
much young girls he sexually assaulted
them he did so under the guise of
medical treatment and he did so for his
own sexual purpose and gratification he
carried out his flattery decades-long
process he honed and perfected creating
perfect conditions for his predatory
behavior until these brave women brought
it all down sentencing your honor must
protect punish and deter through your
sentence I ask you to do all three jaja
Kulina I ask you to bring these victims
the justice they so deserve
thank you thank you thank you very much
for your word
on behalf of defendant
[Music]
runner I've prepared some remarks today
my client prepared some remarks that
he's going to be reading to the court
but I want to start off on some remarks
that I have not prepared this Court has
provided a foundation for our country to
watch our judicial system as it's
happening and unfolding we have a
constitution in place we learn about the
Constitution when we go to law school
contrary to what the personal or the
perception of Leary's legal team may be
we are all upholding the same document
he has an absolute right to his Ellis
advocacy he's got an absolute right to a
defense he has an absolute right to be
represented by counsel and while some
may disagree to the way that this case
transpired the conduct of counsel this
is what our Constitution permits and I
can tell you and anybody else listening
that unequivocally I would be standing
next to this man for every trial that he
would hold every sentencing that he
would have because that's what our
Constitution requires this is not about
us this is not about Larry this is not
about his legal team this is about the
victims that were before the court for
the last seven days but I will tell you
the anger and hatred that they expounded
on the court is something that Larry saw
we all saw and we all heard as we sat in
the court this morning we received an
email from somebody who was anonymous
that wished death upon our kids for
standing next to the man and upholding a
constitution a document and in both that
we took when we all went to law school
whether you're a judge a defense lawyer
or work for the government we are doing
our jobs you are doing your job and the
government is doing their job I would
stand by the counsel that we have
representing dr. nasir and I would
represent Larry again now people ask us
all the time it's very sorry for what he
has done and others ask what Larry is
like while some comment on how he's
changed I'll tell you that Larry is
sorry for what he's done but we realized
that these words are completely
consequential to those that are
listening and fall woefully short of an
adequate apology to fully address what
has transpired as adults we understand
their consequences for our actions
Larry's actions have led to an
unquantifiable amount of pain as adults
we should be the only ones who feel pain
for our own actions sadly one of the
many tragedies in this case is the pain
that was articulated these past seven
days is not residing with Leary but
instead and more significantly that is
felt by the hundred plus women who have
dressed him addressed him in court he is
sorry for the hurt that he has caused
and he is sorry to each and every one of
the individuals who have come before
your honor but an apology is not going
to be enough sometimes individuals can
take solace that a small portion of the
pain that someone has inflicted on
others can be seen in their own
appearance and personality although it
pales in comparison to what we heard
these past few days
Larry's soul is broken he is the shell
of a person that we all first met he is
reserved and soft-spoken his tears are
more frequent and our conversations are
more somber as you all know we sat with
Larry these last few days and saw what
he saw he saw the pain hurt and anger on
your faces
your words will stay with them and leave
an indelible mark on his soul for the
remainder of his life he realizes that
what he is feeling is nothing compared
to the pain and heard all of his victims
are feeling and were discussed in this
courtroom today I can assure you that
your words have pierced his soul and
softened his voice that will never
change I know Larry wants to address the
court as well sir please raise your
right hand
do you swear or affirm the testimony
you're about to provide urban food
cultures and nothing of the truth under
penalty of perjury not sure
thank you you need to come up right up
to the podium like the microphone what
would you like me to know it's just a
short statement your words these past
several days have had a significant
emotional effect on myself and it's
shaky to my core they also recognize
that what I'm feeling pairs the
comparison to the pain trauma and
emotional destruction death in front of
how sorry I am for what has occurred
acceptable apology sir you need to stay
off the microphone or they can't be an
acceptable apology told you is
impossible to write and convey I won't
carry your words with me for the rest of
my things
sir I hope that's true I hope you are
shaken to your core their victims are
clearly shaken to their core and I know
there are still some who asked are you
broken because you got caught first let
me address the council I agree with your
words in regard to no one should blame
defense counsel and vigilante crime is
not tolerated so I hope but no one would
do anything untoward began to counsel
their children their families their
firms their cars whatever this does cry
crying was crying solves absolutely
nothing please respect their job it's a
difficult one I know I've been in their
shoes and the sixth amendment does
guarantee each defendant the right to
counsel doesn't matter what the
defendant has done but they have the
right to counsel I also want to say that
being said we also have the First
Amendment so you are all free to have
your own opinion and it's always a
balancing act between the First
Amendment the 60 minute all of the due
process and other counts amendments to
the Constitution they are all valuable
in there
way and that's why we haven't organized
and just society and that's why we are
here today because this defendant has
been brought to justice
do not make it worse please before I get
into sentencing I want to talk about a
couple of things and first I've said
what I need to say to the victims I have
a little bit more to say you are no
longer victims you are survivors you're
very strong and I've addressed you
individually before I say anything
further I don't know if you all know
this I know that the world is watching I
know this because I'm on the bench every
day and this isn't the only heinous
crime that appears in this court the
National Crime Victimization survey
that's done by the Justice Department
annually reports that 310 out of every
1000 assaults are reported to police
which means that two out of three go
unreported the voices of the survivors
have allies everyone report keep your
voice up Rachel's voice hopefully will
raise these numbers of reports and all
of your voices but that statistic does
not include children 12 and under one in
ten children will be sexually abused by
their 18th birthday one in seven girls
one in 25 boys by their 18th birthday
that means that in the United States I'm
not talking about any other country but
in the United States
400,000 babies born in the US will
become victims of child
show abuse it stops now speak out like
these survivors become part of the army
I knew one case at a time and I really
so very much appreciate all of you thank
you I've read some of the Twitter's and
Facebook's take all of what's going on
in the media I'm not special I'm doing
my job if you come into my courtroom any
Wednesday watch sentencing I give
everybody a voice
I give defendants avoids their families
when they're here
I give that filtered voice I try to
treat everybody like family because
that's the justice system but I was
raised to believe in I came to this
country stateless I'm naturalized my
father's Maltese my mother's German and
I was raised on old country values and
my grandmother always told me and my
parents always told me my grandfather
too that America is the greatest country
I believe that that's why I served in
the military that's why I've always some
community service I'm not really
well-liked because I speak out
I don't have many friends because I
speak out you're asking a question you
better be ready for the answer I speak
out because I want change because I
don't believe in hiding the truth and
I'm not saying I'm always right
but I try I also don't believe that one
size fits all when it comes to
sentencing another reason I listen I
know that there are some judges for
every crime they give the same
punishment I don't think that's justice
I believe an individualized everything I
follow the Constitution and I believe
our system works I also believe these
survivors now there's case law about how
I can consider what I can consider and
first and foremost my sentence reflects
the seven in regard to who defended
Clinton Metro but the remainder of you
161 others and to the credibility of
those seven so technically I'm
considering everything everyone because
you're crying all of your crimes the
depth of them have cut into the core of
this community in many communities and
all of the families and people we don't
even know
yes sir
the media has asked me to release your
letter I'm not going to do that counsel
may object the media may object but
there is some information in here that
troubles me in regard to the victims and
I don't want that worry victimized by
the words that you have in here what
they do want to read some more of your
letter and the reason I want to do that
is because I've considered it in
sentencing as an extend as an extension
of your apology and whether I believe it
or not so I want you to hear their words
I've already read the poem and I'm not
reading everyone begin the federal judge
went ballistic at sentencing since I
pled guilty to the state cases and spent
10% on the federal case and 90% found
the state cases and civil suits
she gave me 60 years instead of five to
twenty years in parentheses three
consecutive 20-year sentences I'm
pleaded guilty to possession porn from
nine 2004 to 12 2004 four months the
prosecutor even admitted that I never
belonged to any porn sites any chatroom
was not on the dark web and also they
could not prove I viewed it it was all
deleted of course I shared my
electronics and I couldn't
to prove that show for four months of
porn possession from 2004 I was
sentenced to 16 years not proper
appropriate fare going down a few lines
what I did in the state cases was
medical not sexual but because of a porn
I lost all support thus another reason
for the state guilty plea let me move
down further
so I'm trying to avoid a trial to save
the stress to this community my family
the victims yeah look what is happening
it is wrong I was at the doctor because
my treatments work and those patients
that are now speaking out were the same
ones that prays and came back over and
over and referred family and friends to
see me the media convinced them that
everything I did was wrong and met
please feel my broke their trust hell
hath no fury like a woman scorned
[Music]
complete nightmare the stories that are
being fabricated to sensationalize this
then the AG would only accept my plea if
I said what I did was not medical and
was for my own pleasure they forced me
to say that or they were going to trial
and not accepting the plea I wanted to
plead no contest
but the AG refused that I was so
manipulated by
and now aqua Lena and all I wanted was
to minimize stress to everyone life I
wrote earlier going down a little bit
further in addition with the federal
case my medical treatments with the
Olympic / national team gymnastics were
to stuff as part of the police the FBI
investigated them in 2013 and found
nothing substantial and because it was
medical now they are seeking the media
attention and financial for
would you like to withdraw your plea no
your eyes because you are guilty aren't
you are you guilty sir
I said my plea exactly
the new sign language has become
treatment these quotes these air quotes
I will never see them again without
thinking of you and your despicable acts
I don't care how they're used I will
always think of quotes and the worst
treatment there was not treatment what
you did it was not medical there is no
medical evidence that was ever brought
when this case first came to me and I've
told you this and I apologized to the
Olympians and athletes but I have five
children two dogs my parents live with
me I work four jobs I don't have much
time for television I don't watch sports
although last year I was a soccer coach
much to the laughter of my family I
didn't know anything about you your name
or anything that was going on
and so when I kept saying we're going to
trial here's the date and everyone
wanted more time I said don't use the
cost and then the cases were merged and
we delayed it and I still thought well
maybe there's a defense of medical
treatment why do they think that because
it's my job to be fair and impartial but
also because my two brothers and my
father are very well known and respected
doctors real doctors with real
treatments and research dedicated to
healing I haven't considered that in
this case but I have heard from your
survivors now that leaves trust doctors
like I trust the doctors in my family
the doctors I go to but I still thought
while there's a defense of medical
treatment and there are changes in the
medical community every day for the
betterment
so up until the time you fled I believed
that maybe there was a defense here
despite for selling the information I
was ready for trial your counsel was
ready for trial
the Attorney General's Office was ready
for trial you sir decided to plead
because there was no medical treatment
you did this for your pleasure and your
control this letter which comes to month
after your pleat tells me that you have
not yet owned what you did but you still
think but somehow you are right that you
are a doctor that you're entitled that
you don't have to listen and then you
did treatment I wouldn't send my dogs to
you sir
there's no treatment here you finally
told the truth
in action is an action violence is
indifference justice requires action and
a voice and that is what has happened
here in this Court a hundred and sixty
eight buckets of water were placed and
your so called match that got out of
control
and I also like lime course or like the
Attorney General want to thank law
enforcement for their investigation but
I also want to be the voice on behalf of
these survivors who asks law enforcement
to continue their fine work and to also
include the federal government there has
to be a massive investigation as to why
there was in action why there was
silence justice for the players more
than what I can do on this bench I
wanted to also applaud all of the
counsel in the attorney general's office
I want to also applaud defense counsel
you all have done fine work you've made
me proud of our legal system we all work
together for the betterment of our
community and dad as law enforcement
prosecutors defense counsel
investigators there are countless people
it's the only way our system works we
need this balance so all of you when I
look at myself as Lady Justice my arms
are like this they are balanced
prosecution defense are balanced it only
starts to tip after there's a plea and
after trying to take into consideration
everything
happened so I want everyone should
understand I've also done the homework I
always do people versus waffle on ski
I'm sure I slaughtered the name I
apologize but it is spelled with W ACL
aw s okay I 286 Misha 634 it's a 2009
case and in it and I want you to clearly
understand it says plainly the law does
not limit victims impact statements to
direct victims he doesn't stage and I
have found nowhere that limousine from
having you here all of your visions
as I said before when counsel came to me
and said we're not going to go to trial
just fight Court having already sent out
200 of the 800 juror requests and they
told me their plea and would I consider
it a new trial there was the agreement
between us because I've always and they
know it they are familiar with me what
people speak and I wanted all victims
and we had a discussion about which
victims and of course there was an
objection to one of them I want it come
in anyway
that was part of the plea that you
entered into to allow the victim impact
statements because they after that
discussion I know your lawyers as good
as they are set down with you inside the
judge is going to allow this and when it
comes down to it I know it also because
this was fined by the Attorney General
by defendant and by defendants counsel
on November 22nd 2017
[Applause]
aside from the letter but you wrote a
couple of months after your plea which
tells me you still don't get it there's
something I don't understand
and I want to make clear sir you knew
you had a problem that is clear to me
you knew you had a problem from a very
young age even before you are doctor you
could have taken yourself away from
temptation and you did not but worse yet
there isn't a survivor who hasn't come
in here and said how world-renowned you
were I trust what they say you could
have gone anywhere in the world
to be treated you could have gone to any
resort any doctor place where you could
get treatment in Europe they have all
sorts of hidden places for things like
this no one had to know and you could
have found with treatment some help take
it some medicine you would have done
that if you had cancer I know you would
have your about self-preservation but
you decided to not address once inside
you that causes this control urge that
causes you to be a sexual predator
so your urges escalated and based on the
numbers that we all know go unreported I
can't even guess how many vulnerable
children and families you actually
assaulted
your decision to assault was precise
calculated manipulative devious
despicable I don't have AdWords because
you're survivors have said all of that I
don't want to repeat it
you can't give them back their innocence
their youth you can't give a father back
his life for one other you are the
victims her life
when she took it I can't return the
daughter the mother the father to the
daughter
you played on everyone's vulnerability
I'm not vulnerable not to you not to
other criminals at that podium I swore
to uphold the Constitution and the law
and I am well-trained I know exactly
what to do and there's a time I'm going
to do it and I want you to know as much
as it was my honor and privilege to hear
the sister survivors it is my honor and
privilege to sentence you because sir
you do not deserve to walk outside of a
prison ever again you have done nothing
to control those urges and anywhere you
want destruction will occur to those
most vulnerable
now I honor the agreement that's been
requested of me and I want you to know
[Music]
I'm not good at man
I'm a cheat sheet I'm only a lawyer I
know that you have a higher education in
physics and math what I have a cheat
sheet it is my privilege on count one
choose 5 8 10 and 18
and 24
to sentence you to 40 years and when I
look at my cheat sheet 40 years just so
you know and you can count it off your
calendar
it's 480 months the talent because I
need to send a message to the parole
board in the event somehow God is
gracious and I know he is and you
survived the 60 years in federal court
first and then you start in my 40 years
you've gone off the page here as to what
I'm doing my page only goes 200 years
sir I'm giving you 175 news switches
I just find herself orange.i I need
everyone to be quiet myself channels
powers I told you I'm not nice I find
that you don't get it that you're a
danger you remain a danger I'm a judge
with leaves and life and rehabilitation
when rehabilitation is possible
I have many defendants from back here
and showing us great things they've done
in their lives after probation after
for all I don't find its possible with
you so you will receive jail credit
accounts one two five eight ten and
eighteen three hundred sixty nine days
on count twenty four you will have three
hundred and seventy various jail credit
if you are ever out which is doubtful
you and you acquired to register as a
Michigan sex offenders Registration Act
complying with all of the requirements
of that Act in addition to global
position monitoring system you would
wear a GPS you will pay restitution in
the amount to be determined based on
whatever amount are submitted and your
attorneys can ask me for restitution
hearing so that I can determine what a
reasonable amount
I am leaving restitution open as long as
those victims have issues that can be
medically documented you will comply
with DNA testing and pay a sixty dollar
fee for that I suspect that was already
done but you owe sixty dollars back to
the county for that or a law enforcement
whoever will put it in the right pocket
you must submit to HIV testing and
complete counseling associated with HIV
and AIDS in this way of confidentiality
and the last test results and medical
information containing this test to be
released to the court you will pay 476
dollars in state funding you will pay a
crime victims of staff to the United 130
dollars this counsel wish to address our
cost and fine I don't know his finance
state judge she doesn't have any money
to pay the court costs and fines if the
court wants to impose it the court can
impose it I'm not imposing any court
costs and fines and here's the reason I
don't know what he has or what he'll get
in the future the victims deserve the
money the county will survive one way or
another I'm also going to make
recommendations and Michigan Department
of Corrections for mental health
treatment health treatment I understand
he has medical conditions and he should
be allowed to take medicine for that you
should have individual and group
counseling even for sexual predators
whatever they allow I'm also going to
send a message I'm not sure but I
believe I read an article sir that you
were treating people in prison that
don't have a license don't commit any
more crimes I know you don't have any
more lives together but you can't be
treating people you're not a doctor so
I'm not sure how that's happening what I
wanted to send that message
you have 21 days to appeal 10 days to
request court-appointed counsel to
acknowledge receipt of your appellate
rights Your Honor I've got the notice of
right to appeal and I'm providing it
sort of my way now do acknowledge it yes
yes right thank you
let me just say to the media again I'm
just doing my job
I know you all want to talk to me my
Secretary has informed me that I have a
growing stack of requests from print
media television from magazines from
around the world literally the story is
not about me it never was about me I
hope I've opened some doors but you see
I'm a little stupid because I thought
everybody did what I did
and if they didn't maybe they ought to
but I do this and have been doing it and
if you don't believe me but keeper of my
words is right by my side and lawyers
who are curious are shaking their heads
saying yeah I've waited too long as she
lets everybody talk sometimes people get
upset I don't care I get paid the same
so I asked for the media if you want to
talk with me I'm not going to be making
any statements I know that my office and
I may have even I don't know been one a
couple of weeks convey that after this
is over
it's just not my story
after the appellate period runs went
victims by my side to tell their stories
I might answer some more questions and
like that on the record
I don't know what more I could possibly
say but I'm not going to talk with any
media person until after the appeal
period and even then if you talk to me
about this case I will have a survivor
with me because it is their story
so I wanted everybody to hear that from
me I respect all of the media outlets
you have done just a fabulous job here
there hasn't been any coercion or upset
by this and I do believe in the First
Amendment so I thank you all for being
here because it's an important story for
the survivors as to today I know that
there are a lot of survivors family
members husbands friends a lot of people
in the courtroom you have voices I'm
going to leave the courtroom defendant
will leave the courtroom the attorneys
may stay the victim's family members
survivors
the media so you can have your own press
conference right here spur-of-the-moment
sometimes works out the best doesn't it
again I will leave the statement until
after the appeal period and then if
there's any survivor that who at that
point if somebody wants to talk to me
I'm sure you'll be moved on to another
story but if you're not please give your
name's Julie the victims advocate so the
Viking contactors because please media
do not contact me on this story without
a survivor it's their story I thank
everybody in this case sir I hope
somewhere you have heard everybody's
words and it really does resonate with
you anything else for the record
nothing good happens alright so the
media is asked to stay here with all
those lovely people who may want to
speak with the things that's all for the
record
[Applause]
[Music]
okay girl throw yo
yeah